When Hurricane Maria
hit Puerto Rico in 2017,
we all watched as a disaster
played out on our screens.
At least 160,000 people were displaced,
and nearly 3,000 people died.
Electricity was cut off
to the entire island,
and some neighborhoods
didn't get power back for 11 months.
Many of those watching
didn't know how to help.
Some donated to international NGOs.
Some lobbied their elected officials.
But as with so many crises,
so many of us simply gave in
and felt helpless.
At the Humanitarian OpenStreetMap Team,
also known as HOT,
we did something different.
We mobilized 6,000 volunteers
across the world
who mapped every home
and every road in Puerto Rico.
And here you can see the maps
those volunteers made taking shape.
Responders then used those maps
to assess the state of buildings and roads
and to provide emergency funds,
WiFi and phone-charging points
to people whose homes were damaged.
All crises,
including the COVID-19 pandemic
we're living through right now,
have devastating characteristics.
But many of them have one thing in common:
the people hit the hardest are often
literally not on the map.
Right now, more than one billion people
live in places that are not mapped.
If you look those places up online,
you'll see nothing but a blank.
And that blank isn't just
a huge statement of disrespect
to our fellow human beings,
it's an injustice,
causing very direct, very real
and very avoidable human suffering.
So what does not being
on the digital map actually look like?
I live in Peru, and a few months ago,
some community health workers
asked us to help them map.
Obviously, where they were wasn't mapped,
so to get there, we asked
a local mayor to draw the route.
This is what he drew.
This piece of paper
was hard to follow. (Laughs)
We didn't really know
what these lines were.
He put some numbers on there
that he assured us were travel times,
but as we were driving along,
these did not correspond to our reality.
But this isn't about me getting lost
or about shaming
someone's bad drawing skills.
Think how inefficient it is
to manage a team
who need to work in this place
without a map to tell them
where they need to go.
Then, once they're in the right village,
how can they collect some data
and associate it to that place?
Those community health workers
know that needs in this region are high,
particularly anemia
and malnutrition among children.
They just don't know
where those children are,
or what is causing that problem.
They want to be able to locate
the home of every child under five,
but how can they do that without a map?
After a brief training,
we went out to make a map,
and this is what those community
health workers produced.
This map has everything
you need to navigate,
like the rivers and bridges,
but it also has every local landmark,
the school, the football pitch, the plaza.
And I'm pleased to say
that a few weeks ago,
we got a call from
those community health workers,
and they're using this map
in their response containing COVID-19.
So you might be thinking:
Why aren't these places
on commercial maps?
In short, mapping the most
vulnerable places in our world
just hasn't been a priority
for for-profit companies,
whose business models typically rely
on advertising and data sales.
This leaves out the poorest communities
and means that individual
aid organizations create maps
for the small areas
that they're working in
in offline systems which rapidly
become out-of-date when a project ends.
So what we have here
is a lack of easily shareable
and easily updatable data.
But we also have a solution.
We map with a tool
called OpenStreetMap,
which was founded in 2006
and is a free, open-source tool
which anyone can use to map the world.
Just as anyone can read or edit
an article on Wikipedia,
anyone can use or edit
the map in OpenStreetMap,
and the resulting map is public good,
free and open for anyone to use,
creating one map for all of us.
It works in two phases.
Buildings and roads might not
be on the map yet,
but you can see them clearly
in satellite imagery.
Volunteers working anywhere in the world
turn satellite images into maps
through drawing the buildings and roads
on top of them.
We call this a base map.
On average, each time a volunteer logs in,
they map an area less than
10 kilometers squared,
but add all those contributions together,
and you can map entire cities
in just a couple of days.
And second, local mapping.
People living and working
in the places we're mapping
take that base map and color it in,
for example, identifying:
Is this building a school or a hospital?
Those people add information
you can't see in a satellite image.
We found people able and eager to map
in even the most challenging
situations worldwide,
and we've optimized the tools
to work on smartphones
costing as little as 30 dollars.
Additionally, the tools work offline,
so people without regular access
to cell service can still contribute,
adding things to the map
as they go about their daily lives,
and then uploading when they get access
to cell service or WiFi.
In 10 years, we've seen people
from all walks of life take part.
Refugees have mapped broken water points.
Rural women have added place names
in Indigenous languages.
And, in doing so, people become
active agents of change
in their communities.
Since 2010, HOT has engaged
over 200,000 volunteers
who have mapped an area
home to more than 150 million people
in OpenStreetMap.
Those maps have been used
by search and rescue operations
to free hundreds of people
trapped in collapsed buildings
after the 2010 Haiti earthquake.
They've been used to provide
polio vaccinations to children
across all of rural Nigeria.
And they've mapped the camps,
routes and new homes
of more than eight million refugees
fleeing South Sudan, Syria and Venezuela.
We work with the biggest
humanitarian organizations in the world
to make sure these maps have impact --
the Red Cross, Médecins Sans Frontières,
UNICEF to name a few --
and we currently have a queue
of more than 2,000 places
needing to be mapped.
So that's the story so far.
But wouldn't it be great
if these places were on the map
before they were in crisis?
Now we're ready for a step change.
Over the past few years,
we've gained access to global,
regularly updated satellite imagery.
Machine learning and AI
are helping human mappers
to work more efficiently.
And worldwide, more and more people
are willing and able
to map their communities.
Over the next five years,
we'll engage one million volunteers
who will map an area
home to the one billion
most vulnerable people
across 94 countries.
To achieve this,
we need to do three things.
First, we need to grow our community
to one million mappers,
who will build a world
where everyone everywhere is represented.
We'll set up a network of regional hubs
to train and support those volunteers
to map the vulnerable places
in their own countries.
Second, we need to invest in technology.
Right now, you can add something
like a building or a local landmark
to the map in just a few seconds,
but learning to map
and mapping easily
and quickly on a mobile
can be a problem.
We need to invest in technologies
to make mobile edits to the map
possible at a massive scale.
And third, we need to raise awareness.
Aid projects across the world need to know
that these maps are free
and available for them to use
and that they can request maps
for the areas that they're working in.
For me, this is one of the most
wonderful things about this project.
It isn't really about HOT
or any single organization.
It's about creating a foundation
on which so many
organizations will thrive.
Whatever we do,
disasters and crises will still happen,
and humanitarians
will still respond to them.
Development programs will continue,
but without maps,
they'll lack critical information
about what to expect in the community
before they get there.
With open, free, up-to-date maps,
those programs will have more impact
than they would do otherwise,
leading to a meaningful difference
in lives saved or improved.
But it's so much more than that.
It's 2020, and one billion people
in our world are not visible.
That's wrong.
This is a tool through which
every citizen of Planet Earth
can become known and seen,
to literally be put on the map.
My peers complain about being
too overconnected,
so how can it be possible
for more than a billion people
to remain invisible?
Luckily, this is a problem
even the laziest among us
can help to solve.
If you can swipe left or right,
you can help.
Map this morning
and influence life-changing
decisions this afternoon.
Frontline health workers and humanitarians
are literally waiting for you.
Thank you.